[[!meta title="Howto install a vanilla ArchLinux on a Kimsufi/OVH server"]]
[[!tag archlinux ovh kimsufi]]

A few years ago, when I succeeded in installing a vanilla ArchLinux on my
[kimsufi](http://www.kimsufi.com) (aka the cheap dedicated servers provider by
OVH) server, I only took a few notes that stayed on my computer and never made
it to the web.

Now that I just started renting a new more powerful server (Core i3, 8GB ram and
2To HDD for 20€/month) and that I have to reinstall ArchLinux from scratch, I'm
taking the time to write a proper article about the procedure. Hopefully it can
help others (although it seems like lots of other people had got it working and
already wrote articles about it).

# Boot in rescue mode

The very first step which will make our life easier is to add your public ssh
key to your kimsufi account so that you can log in directly after booting in
rescue mode. Go to the online manager, and copy-paste your public key (probably
`~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`) on the `SSH keys` web page.

Now configure your server to boot in rescue mode by selecting `Rescue` and
`rescue-pro` in the `Netboot` menu, and restart.

Wait a couple minutes and everything went well you should be able to ssh your
server (with user `root`) and get a prompt.

# Prepare the system

For this install, we will assume the hard disk was formatted with GPT. This was
the default in my case.

With GPT-formatted hard disks, GRUB requires that there is a small (i.e. a
couple megabytes) special BIOS boot partition. Note that this partition is not
the `/boot` partition and does not need to be mounted. It's there to hold an
image that GRUB will create for us later on.

We create a 2-MiB partition (`/dev/sda1`) for the BIOS boot and use a second
partition managed by LVM for the rest (in case I want to resize my partitions
later). I did the partitioning with `gdisk` since it's made for GPT and it was
available on the rescue system. Make sure that the BIOS boot partition has the
type `0xEF02` and the LVM partition the type `0x8E00`. At the end, my partition
table looked like:

    # gdisk -l /dev/sda
    ...
    Number  Start (sector)    End (sector)  Size       Code  Name
       1            2048            6143   2.0 MiB     EF02  BIOS boot partition
       2            6144      3907029134   1.8 TiB     8E00  Linux LVM

On `/dev/sda2`, I created four LVM volumes: `/` (20 GiB), `/var` (20 GiB),
`/srv` (20 GiB) and `/home` (the rest).

The first command creates a physical volume on `/dev/sda2`. The second command
creates a volume group name `vg0` on `/dev/sda2`.

    # pvcreate /dev/sda2
    # vgcreate vg0 /dev/sda2

We can now create our four logical volumes. The first three have a size of 20
GiB, while the last one gets the remaining free space.

    # lvcreate -L 20G vg0 -n root
    # lvcreate -L 20G vg0 -n var
    # lvcreate -L 20G vg0 -n srv
    # lvcreate -l 100%FREE vg0 -n home

We can check that these logical volumes were properly created with `lvdisplay`
or at least by checking the content of `/dev/vg0`.

    # ls -1 /dev/vg0
    home
    root
    srv
    var

The logical volumes can now be formatted with your chosen filesystem. In my
case, I'm using ext4.

    # mkfs.ext4 /dev/vg0/home
    # mkfs.ext4 /dev/vg0/root
    # mkfs.ext4 /dev/vg0/srv
    # mkfs.ext4 /dev/vg0/var

# Install ArchLinux

The first step in order to install ArchLinux in our newly created root
filesystem is to mount the logical volumes. To this end, we use the directory
`/mnt` which already exists on the rescue system.

    # mount /dev/vg0/root /mnt
    # mkdir /mnt/home
    # mkdir /mnt/srv
    # mkdir /mnt/var
    # mount /dev/vg0/home /mnt/home
    # mount /dev/vg0/srv /mnt/srv
    # mount /dev/vg0/var /mnt/var

To install a base ArchLinux system onto our root filesystem, we will use the
bash script [arch-bootstrap](https://github.com/tokland/arch-bootstrap).
Download it with `wget` or `curl` and run it.

    # wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tokland/arch-bootstrap/master/arch-bootstrap.sh
    # chmod +x arch-bootstrap.sh
    # ./arch-bootstrap.sh /mnt

At this point, we have a base ArchLinux system but we're not ready to chroot to
it yet because most likely the entropy is too low and won't be enough to
initialize pacman's keyring. To solve this, we need to download the package
`haveged` ourselves and put it in our new filesystem so we can install it
manually after chrooting.

    # wget -O /mnt/tmp/haveged.tar.xz https://www.archlinux.org/packages/extra/x86_64/haveged/download/

# Chroot to the new filesystem

Before chrooting, we need to mount a few more things, such as `/dev`, `/proc`,
etc.

    # mount --bind /proc /mnt/proc
    # mount --bind /sys /mnt/sys
    # mount --bind /dev /mnt/dev
    # mount --bind /dev/pts /mnt/dev/pts

Now, chroot to the new filesystem.

    # chroot /mnt

The next step is to logically initialize pacman's keyring. But before that, we
need to install the `haveged` package that we have just downloaded and run it to
accelerate the generation of more entropy.

    # cd /
    # tar xJf /tmp/haveged.tar.xz
    # haveged -w 1024

Now initialize pacman's keyring.

    # pacman-key --init
    # pacman-key --populate archlinux

# Complete the install

Install the `base` and `base-devel` package groups.

    # pacman -S base base-devel

There are a few last steps before we can reboot and get access to our new
system.

Start by generating an `/etc/fstab` file.

    # pacman -S arch-install-scripts
    # genfstab / > /etc/fstab

Then, setup your locale by editing `/etc/locale.gen` and running `locale-gen`,
and indicated your preferred locale in `/etc/locale.conf`.

    # vi /etc/locale.gen
    ... uncomment required locales ...
    # locale-gen
    # echo LANG=en_US.UTF-8 > /etc/locale.conf

The next step is to have our LVM volumes work, especially our root volume. For
that, you need to edit the file `/etc/mkinitcpio.conf` and add the `lvm2` hook
in the list of `HOOKS`, exactly between `block` and `filesystem`.

    # cat /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
    ...
    HOOKS="base udev autodetect modconf block lvm2 filesystems keyboard fsck"
    ...

Recreate a new initramfs image so that the LVM hook is generated as part of it.

    # mkinitcpio -p linux

Install a bootloader, for example GRUB.

    # pacman -S grub
    # grub-install /dev/sda
    # grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg

Now the most difficult step of this whole process is to get the network to work.
It's a pain and I'm still not sure how it precisely work. The issue is that the
rescue system presents the Ethernet interface as `eth0` while systemd/udev on
ArchLinux want a [Predictable Network Interface
Name](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd/PredictableNetworkInterfaceNames/).

At first, I thought that my Ethernet interface would be called `enp0s25` but
after a few tries with netctl, it didn't work. I ended up switching to
systemd-networkd (and the matching rule `en*`) which allowed me to access my
server after reboot and discover that the Ethernet interface was actually named
`eno1`. Go figure...

Knowing the real interface name, I eventually switched back to netctl and it
seems to be working.

But basically, what seems to be the simplest way is to enable DHCP through
systemd-networkd by editing a new file in `/etc/systemd/network/dhcp.network`
(see content below) and enable the corresponding systemd service.

    # cat /etc/systemd/network/dhcp.network
    [Match]
    Name=en*
    [Network]
    DHCP=ipv4
    # systemctl enable systemd-networkd

Once you have successfully rebooted your server with an operational network, you
can check what the real Ethernet interface is with `ip addr` and 1/ switch back
to another network manager if you want and 2/ switch to a static IP
configuration.

Now install `openssh` and enable the SSH daemon so that you can connect to your
server after rebooting it.

    # pacman -S openssh
    # systemctl enable sshd

Setup a password for the root account.

    # passwd

And finally, create a user (by default, sshd won't let you log with the root
user, which would be a bad idea anyway).

    # adduser -m -G wheel,systemd-journal <user>
    # passwd <user>

# Reboot

The decisive moment has arrived. In the kimsufi manager, setup the boot to be
from the local hard disk instead of from the network.

Exit the chrooted environment by typing `exit` or `Ctrl-D`, and unmount all the
partitions that you mounted before.

umount /mnt/proc
umount /mnt/sys
umount /mnt/dev/pts
umount /mnt/dev
umount /mnt/boot
umount /mnt/var
umount /mnt

Reboot the server, wait a couple minutes and try to ssh to it again. Hopefully
it should work and you should get a ssh prompt!

    # ssh <user>@your-server-ip
    $

You can now go on with configuring your install properly.

