[[!meta title="How to make bottle.py play well with lighttpd"]]
[[!tag bottlepy flup lighttpd archlinux]]

# On bottle.py's side

[Bottle](http://bottlepy.org) is a really great and simple micro web-framework
for Python. Recently, I've been able to put up a web front-end for my [[jpass]]
application within days.

By default, bottlepy supports WSGI server, which is fine if you use Apache.
Unfortunately, lighttpd does not support WSGI.

So in case you don't want to use the basic CGI (which bottlepy supports too),
then you have to wrap your bottle application inside a WSGI server: for
example, [flup](http://www.saddi.com/software/flup/) which is then compatible
with lighttpd's fastCGI interface.

## Bottlepy typical application

Let's assume a simple application with static files and an index:

    import bottle

    ## url formatting in templates
    bottle.SimpleTemplate.defaults["get_url"] = bottle.url

    @bottle.route("/static/<filepath:path>", name="static")
    def server_static(filepath):
        return bottle.static_file(filepath, root="static")

    @bottle.route("/")
    @bottle.route("/<user>")
    def index(user=None):
        return bottle.template("index", user=user)

Inside the *index* template, using the `get_url()` trick (see
[here](http://stackoverflow.com/a/9525572) for more):

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html lang="en">
    <head>
        ...
        <script type="text/javascript" src="{{get_url("static", filepath="js/app.js")}}"></script>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="{{get_url("static", filepath="css/style.css")}}">
        ...
    </head>
    ...
    </html>

For this example, the file hierarchy would be:

    $ tree
    .
    ├── webapp.py
    ├── static
    │   ├── css
    │   │   └── style.css
    │   └── js
    │       └── app.js
    └── views
        └── index.tpl

## Connecting flup

With bottlepy's built-in webserver, everything should work perfectly fine. Now
if you want to wrap your bottlepy web application inside flup in order to make
compatible with lighttpd's fastCGI interface, you have to add a few lines.

However, and that is the most important part, do not use the flup wrapper
provided by bottlepy (`webapp.bottle.run(server="flup")`) but do the wrapping
yourself.

For that, let's edit a new file `webapp_fcgi.py` located in the root folder and
write:

    #!/usr/bin/env python

    import flup.server.fcgi
    import webapp
    import os

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        # Change working directory so relative paths (and template lookup) work again
        os.chdir(os.path.dirname(__file__))
        # start flup webserver
        flup.server.fcgi.WSGIServer(webapp.bottle.default_app()).run()

Make this file executable, it will later be easier for lighttpd's configuration.

# On lighttpd's side

Now it is time to make that work with lighttpd. Let's assume your web
application is, following the Archlinux's guidelines, installed in
`/usr/share/webapps/`. And let's also assume that you want your web application
to be accessible through the Internet at the URL `http://yourwebsite/webapp/`.

Now here is what the configuration could be like for lighttpd:

    var.webapp_url = "/webapp"
    var.webapp_path = "/usr/share/webapps/webapp"
    var.webapp_fcgi = "webapp_fcgi.py"

    # webapp rule
    $HTTP["url"] =~ "^" + webapp_url + "(|/.*)" {
        # use this path instead of the normal document-root
        alias.url += (webapp_url => webapp_path)
        # new index file
        index-file.names = (webapp_fcgi)
        # rewriting rule
        url.rewrite-once = (
            # do not rewrite an already well formatted url
            "^" + webapp_url + "/" + webapp_fcgi + "(|/.*)$" => "$0",
            # rewrite only if looking like /webapp/<toto> (to /webapp/webapp_fcgi.py/toto)
            "^" + webapp_url + "(/.*)$" => webapp_url + "/" + webapp_fcgi + "$1",
            )
        # special configuration for python
        fastcgi.server = (
            ".py" => (
                "webapp" => (
                    "bin-path" => webapp_path + "/webapp_fcgi.py",
                    "socket" => state_dir + "/python-fastcgi-webapp.socket",
                    "max-procs" => 1,
                    "check-local" => "disable",
                    )
                )
            )
        }

Note: in my configuration, `state_dir` is setup to be `/var/run/lighttpd`.

There is one trick here that are is some explanations.

## Handling all URLs

If we want our bottlepy web application to handle **all** the requests
(including static file requests) then all has to go through the fastCGI binary.

It has an impact on URLs though, since it means that out of the box an access
to `http://yourwebsite/webapp/toto` can not work: it should be
`http://yourwebsite/webapp/webapp_fcgi.py/toto`.

It is the same for static files, but fortunately that is transparently taken
care of by bottlepy thanks to the `get_url()` trick.

So basically, all we have to do here is to rewrite dynamic URLs in order to
make them go through `webapp_fcgi.py` and that is what the second rewriting
rule does.

We also have to disable the `check-local` fastCGI option, as shown above, so
that lighttpd doesn't check local files corresponding to URLs exist before
transmitting requests to the fastCGI application.

