[[!meta title="IMAPS gateway with getmail and dovecot"]]
[[!tag getmail dovecot archlinux]]

It had been a while I wanted to have another solution for hosting and serving
emails than Gmail.  Especially because I am currently working on the Linux
Kernel and at some point I would like to submit a few patches.  Unfortunately,
it is impossible to use Gmail for sending patches or even, to a greater extend,
to be involved in the LKML.

Also I think it is pretty fancy (nerdy?) to have my own email address, i.e.
`joel@porquet.org`.

At the same time, I have always heard that managing a full email stack (from
the mx DNS records up to the IMAP and SMTP servers) is a pain. It can
definitely happen that my server is down for a few days which would mean that
my emails would be inaccessible in the meantime.

That is why I had this idea of using a stable frontend (i.e. via OVH, my
hosting service company) before my own email server, so that whenever my server
is down, I can still access my emails through this frontend. One could argue
that I could just use the email facility that OVH provides but there are (at
least) two reasons I prefer not to:

* The mailbox OVH offers me is only 2G in size, which is fairly small nowadays.
* I would like to manage my own data (I like the cloud, but only if it is
  mine!)

Here is a picture of what I wanted to achieve (thanks to
[Asciiflow](http://www.asciiflow.com/#Draw) for the following ASCII Flow
Diagram):

    +-----------+              +-----------+               +--------------+
    | OVH       |              | MYSERVER  |               | LAPTOP       |
    |           |              |           |           +-->|--------------|
    | +-------+ | push/delete  | +-------+ | push/sync |   |  MAIL CLIENT +---+
    | | IMAPS +----------------->| IMAPS +<------------+   +--------------+   |
    | +-------+ |              | +-------+ |           |   +--------------+   |
    | +-------+ |              |           |           |   | ANDROID      |   |
    | | SMTP  |<-------+       |           |           +-->|--------------|   |
    | +-------+ |      |       |           |               |  MAIL CLIENT +---+
    +-----------+      |       +-----------+               +--------------+   |
                       +------------------------------------------------------+

In a few words:

* OVH gives me the stable frontend. Whenever my server is down, I can still
  send emails through their STMP server and most of all I can still receive
  emails (they provide IMAP access as well as a RoundCube webmail).
* If everything goes fine, then the emails are retrieved on my server (ideally
  using IMAP IDLE to minimize the communications) and deleted on OVH inbox (we
  will see later how we can actually have a backup of X days on OVH, so that if
  my server is down, I still have access to the most recent received emails on
  OVH).
* My server offers a IMAPS access to my clients (laptop, android, etc.), also
  supporting IMAP IDLE.
* The clients are synchronized with the server so all my emails are accessible
  offline (at least on my laptop; for android, I would limit the
  synchronization to a certain number of days).
* The clients use the STMP server provided by OVH directly.

Everything pretty much relies on two (great) pieces of software:
[getmail](http://pyropus.ca/software/getmail/) and
[dovecot](http://www.dovecot.org/). Getmail will be in charge of fetching the
emails from OVH inbox (using IMAP IDLE), and delivering them to dovecot.
Dovecot will service the IMAPS access to the clients, as well as managing the
mailboxes locally on the server.

**Note: as usual, the preferred Linux distribution here is ArchLinux.**

# Dovecot

After installing dovecot, there are a few steps to have a somewhat secure and
operational installation:

* configure SSL to get IMAPS
* configure the authentication
* configure dovecot
* start dovecot

## SSL

I should have written an article about that before, because I do not remember
the exact procedure, but it turns out I already have a key and certificates for
my server (thanks to [StartSSL](https://www.startssl.com/) who gives free SSL
certifications). I use them to provide a *https* access through lighttpd (e.g.
for this website). What I already had in `/etc/lighttpd/ssl` were the following
files:

    porquet.org.key
    porquet.org.crt
    sub.class1.server.ca.pem
    ca.pem
    ca-certs.crt

* `porquet.org.key` contains the private key for my domain.
* `porquet.org.crt` contains the public certificate for porquet.org followed by
  the content of `porquet.org.key`. It is the file I give to lighttpd as
  `ssl.pemfile`.
* `sub.class1.server.ca.pem` is the intermediate CA certificate (provided by
  StartSSL).
* `ca.pem` is the startcom root CA certificate (also provided by StartSSL).
* `ca-certs.crt` contains the content of `sub.class1.server.ca.pem` and
  `ca.pem` (the order matters). It is the file I give to lighttpd as
  `ssl.ca-file`.

Dovecot needs pretty much the same information, but organized slightly
differently.  It wants the key alone, and one another file containing all the
chain of public certificates. I already had the key alone (`porquet.org.key`)
but I had to create another file that I called `imap.porquet.org.crt` in which
I put, in order, the public certificate for my domain (originally contained in
`porquet.org.crt`), followed by the content of `ca-certs.crt`.

## Authentication

Dovecot offers tons of possibility for the authentication of clients, i.e. when
my laptop or android initiate a connection with dovecot. The simplest solution
was to use the system users, but I did not want to use the same password as the
one I use for accessing my server via SSH (even if supposedly SSL steps in
first, before transmitting the password).

So I used the [Passwd-file](http://wiki2.dovecot.org/AuthDatabase/PasswdFile)
backend. It means you have to create a file, with the same format as
`/etc/passwd` (or `/etc/shadow`), and specify allowed users along with their
password. Not to complicate things too much, I used the same username for
myself as my system user.

Create a file in `/etc/dovecot/auth/passwd`, and add lines to specify allowed users:

    $ cat /etc/dovecot/auth/passwd
    joel:{SHA512-CRYPT}$6$..............

The password is automatically generated with the `doveadm` tool:

    $ doveadm pw -s SHA512-CRYPT

## Dovecot global configuration

On ArchLinux, sample configurations are kept in
`/usr/share/doc/dovecot/example-config`. Copy everything in `/etc/dovecot` and
modify the configuration so it suits your needs. To know the current
configuration, dovecot provides an awesome option that summarizes it for you in
a simple way (as well as giving potential configuration errors):

    $ doveconf -n

Mine looks like (I included comments in the output to explain certain options a
bit):

    # On ArchLinux, this path already exists for serving mails locally
    mail_location = maildir:/var/spool/mail/%u

    # Create the main Inbox folder, as well as a few other useful folders
    namespace inbox {
      inbox = yes
      location =
      mailbox Drafts {
        auto = create
        special_use = \Drafts
      }
      mailbox Junk {
        auto = create
        special_use = \Junk
      }
      mailbox Sent {
        auto = create
        special_use = \Sent
      }
      mailbox Trash {
        auto = create
        special_use = \Trash
      }
      prefix =
    }

    # Authentication database: use the passwd-file approach described above
    passdb {
      args = scheme=CRYPT /etc/dovecot/auth/passwd
      driver = passwd-file
    }

    # Specify an email address where unknown emails should be delivered (it is
    # necessary to declare one, when dovecot receives emails by getmail)
    postmaster_address = joel@porquet.org

    # The only protocol that we serve is IMAPS. Non-SSL IMAP is deactived
    # because its listening port is 0
    protocols = imap
    service imap-login {
      inet_listener imap {
        port = 0
      }
      inet_listener imaps {
        port = 993
        ssl = yes
      }
    }

    # SSL is required, and we give the chain of certificates as well as the
    # private key
    ssl = required
    ssl_cert = </etc/lighttpd/ssl/imap.porquet.org.crt
    ssl_key = </etc/lighttpd/ssl/porquet.org.key

    # After the authentication step, dovecot uses the regular system users of
    # the server
    userdb {
      args = blocking=no
      driver = passwd
    }

## Start dovecot

You should now be able to start dovecot, using `systemd` if you are with
ArchLinux:

    # systemctl start dovecot

You should also be able to configure your email client, and give the address of
your IMAPS server, your username and password (the one defined in
`/etc/dovecot/auth/passwd`, not the system one defined in `etc/passwd`!) And
you should see the mailboxes that are present on the server: namely Inbox,
Sent, Drafts, etc.

Normally you can already send emails, by setting up the address of the external
SMTP server.

But now is time to actually receive emails!

# Getmail

The work that getmail will do is to retrieve emails from OVH inbox and deliver
them to dovecot, so that dovecot can in turn deliver them to the various email
clients.

## Configuration

Contrarily to most of examples, I decided to configure getmail in a
*system-wide* way.

I started by creating a new folder `/etc/getmail`. In this new location, I
created a folder named `joel@porquet.org` that belongs to my system user. And
finally, in this folder, I created a configuration file for getmail (comments
are inline):

    $ cat /etc/getmail/joel@porquet.org/getmailrc

    [retriever]
    type = SimpleIMAPSSLRetriever
    server = ssl0.ovh.net
    port = 993
    username = XXX
    password = XXX
    mailboxes = ALL

    [destination]
    type = MDA_external
    # -e: make dovecot return an error if necessary
    path = /usr/lib/dovecot/deliver
    arguments = ("-e",)

    [options]
    # retrieve only new emails
    read_all = false
    # delete on server after x days
    delete_after = 30
    # do not add a Delivered-To: header field
    delivered_to = false
    # do not add a Received: header field
    received = false

## Startup

At first, you can try your new installation (and see the error messages if
there is any) by starting getmail directly in a shell:

    $ getmail --getmaildir=/etc/getmail/joel@porquet.org --idle INBOX

* the option `--getmaildir` tells getmail to fetch its configuration file
  (`getmailrc`) is the specified directory, instead of `~/.getmail` which is
  the default one.
* the option `--idle INBOX` asks getmail to enter in a IDLE loop instead of
  exiting after fetching emails. This is how IMAP IDLE (i.e. push email) is
  implemented.

Try to send yourself an email and check that the email go through getmail, then
dovecot and finally arrives in your email client!

## Systemd

Now that everything works perfectly, we can make getmail a systemd service so
it is started automatically at boot.

Create a new systemd service, in `/etc/systemd/system`:

    $ cat /etc/systemd/system/getmail@joel.service

    [Unit]
    Description=Getmail for joel@porquet.org
    Wants=dovecot.service
    After=dovecot.service

    [Service]
    User=joel
    ExecStart=/usr/bin/getmail --getmaildir=/etc/getmail/joel@porquet.org --idle INBOX
    Restart=always

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target

Start and enable this new service (log messages will then be accessible via
journactl):

    # systemctl enable getmail@joel.service
    # systemctl start getmail@joel.service

Now, enjoy your new email server!
