[[!meta title="Todo plugin for Ikiwiki"]]
[[!tag ikiwiki]]

Originally, in [ikiwiki](http://ikiwiki.info), the creator maintains lists of
todo pages by placing them in a `todo` folder. When those todo items are done,
they must link to a `done` subpage.

I found this behavior quite annoying since I didn't want to have only one todo
folder containing all my todo items, and also I wanted to be able to add a
deadline dates to those items.

You can find my plugin on the [ikiwiki official
website](http://ikiwiki.info/plugins/contrib/todo/).

## Introduction

This plugin enables marking pages as todo pages, thanks to a new directive. A
deadline can also be specified if the todo page is associated with a date.

It can then be used in [PageSpec](https://ikiwiki.info/ikiwiki/pagespec/) to
only select todo pages, and also in
[SortSpec](https://ikiwiki.info/ikiwiki/pagespec/sorting/) to sort todo pages
by deadline dates.

This plugin is thus perfect for pages dealing with a certain project, for which
a todo list of tasks has to maintained.

## Todo directive

To mark a page as todo page, you have to write the following directive
somewhere in the page (usually at the top of it):

    \[[!todo]]

If a deadline is associated with a deadline date, then provide also the date as
a string, in any format the
[Date::Parse](http://search.cpan.org/perldoc/Date::Parse) perl module can
understand:

    \[[!todo deadline="3 April 1982"]]

When the todo task is done, then mark it as such:

    \[[!todo deadline="3 April 1982" done="yes"]]

## PageSpec and SortSpec

Now, you can select all the todo pages (not done) existing in your wiki:

    \[[!inline pages="* and todo() and !todo(done)" archive="yes"]]

If you want to sort them by deadline dates:

    \[[!inline pages="* and todo() and !todo(done)" archive="yes" sort="todo(deadline)"]]

If you want the list of todo pages that are marked as done:

    \[[!inline pages="* and todo() and todo(done)" archive="yes" sort="todo(deadline)"]]

If you want the list of pages that are not todo pages:

    \[[!inline pages="* and !todo()" archive="yes"]]

## Template

The plugin exports two template parameters, to be used in template pages:

* `tododone`, which gives the information of whether the todo page is marked as
  done or not.
* `tododeadline` which gives the deadline date as a string.

A possible example for a template page could be:

[[!toggle id=template text="Template"]]
[[!toggleable id=template text="""
    <ul>
    <li>

    <TMPL_IF TODODEADLINE>
    <tt>
    <TMPL_VAR TODODEADLINE>: 
    </tt>
    </TMPL_IF>

    <TMPL_IF PERMALINK>
    <a href="<TMPL_VAR PERMALINK>"><TMPL_VAR TITLE></a>
    <TMPL_ELSE>
    <a href="<TMPL_VAR PAGEURL>"><TMPL_VAR TITLE></a>
    </TMPL_IF>

    </li>
    </ul>
"""]]

You can name this file `todopage.tmpl` and place it in your `templates`
directory, at the root of your ikiwiki.

Now you can use when listing todo pages:

    \[[!inline pages="* and todo() and !todo(done)" archive="yes" sort="todo(deadline)" template="todopage"]]

## Source code

The code of the plugin can be found here:
<https://joel.porquet.org/cgit/cgit.cgi/iki-resources.git/tree/IkiWiki/Plugin/todo.pm>

The code of a possible template can be found here:
<https://joel.porquet.org/cgit/cgit.cgi/iki-resources.git/tree/templates/todopage.tmpl>
