[[!meta title="How to make ikiwiki play well with gitolite"]]
[[!tag ikiwiki gitolite lighttpd archlinux]]

# Sources

* <http://rtime.felk.cvut.cz/~sojka/blog/using-ikiwiki-with-gitolite/>
* (fr) <http://insymetrique.net/tech/ikiwiki_et_gitolite/>

# Ikiwiki installation

Start by installing ikiwiki.

*On archlinux, a package is available in
[AUR](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/ikiwiki/) (not up to date
unfortunately at the moment, but the `PKGBUILD` can be tweaked to get the
latest version).*

Add a system user named `ikiwiki`. It helps making a clear separation between
the `http` user that serves the web pages (through lighttpd) and the `git` user
that manages gitolite repositories.

    $ sudo groupadd --system ikiwiki
    $ sudo useradd --system -c 'ikiwiki user' -g ikiwiki -G git -m -d /srv/ikiwiki ikiwiki

The first command creates a system group called `ikiwiki`. The second command
creates a user named `ikiwiki` with the following properties:

* it is a system user,

* its primary group is `ikiwiki` (`-g` option),

* its secondary group is `git` (`-G` option), so that it can later access the
  corresponding git repository managed by gitolite,

* and finally it has a home directory located in `/srv/ikiwiki` (with
  archlinux, services such as gitolite, lighttpd, etc. have their so-called
  home directory in `/srv/`).

# Create a first ikiwiki instance

Before integrating git in the process, start by creating a ikiwiki instance
which can already be put on the web. For that, two directories are required:

* the source of the wiki instance (which will contain the markdown source files)
* the html output (which will be displayed by the webserver)

**Note: from now on, commands prefixed by `$` must be executed by the ikiwiki
user. Basically, run those commands with `sudo -u ikiwiki`.**

Create these directories:

    $ mkdir /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.src
    $ mkdir /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.http

And add some content to the wiki:

    $ echo "Hello world!" > /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.src/index.mdwn

Run the `ikiwiki` command to dump an almost empty setup file (in
`/srv/ikiwiki/wiki.setup`):

    $ ikiwiki /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.src /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.http --dumpsetup /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.setup

Edit and tune the setup file to define (at least) the following options:

* `wikiname`
* `url`
* `add_plugins: goodstuff`

Rerun ikiwiki on the setup file to generate the website:

    $ ikiwiki --setup /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.setup

Configure the webserver to serve `/srv/ikiwiki/wiki.http` as the `url` defined
in the setup file.

*Note: if the webserver can't read the html files generated by ikiwiki, it
might be because the permissions are too restrictive. Edit the wiki setup file
and set option `umask` to `public`.*

# Configure gitolite

Since gitolite manages repository access based on ssh keys, the ikiwiki user
must have its own key. Create ssh keys for the ikiwiki user:

    $ ssh-keygen -t dsa

The command above will create two files, `/srv/ikiwiki/.ssh/id_dsa` and
`/srv/ikiwiki/.ssh/id_dsa.pub`, which are respectively the private and the
public key.

Configure gitolite to create a new git repository and give access to this
repository to the ikiwiki user. In `conf/gitolite.conf`:

    repo    wiki
        RW+ = ikiwiki

Copy ikiwiki's public key in `keydir/ikiwiki.pub`. It is likely that the
permissions of the key need to be corrected.

Before committing and pushing in gitolite, so gitolite creates the requested
repository for the wiki, gitolite must be configured to give ikwiki access to
the repository. Basically, the repository should be accessible by users
belonging to the `git` group, which is the case of the `ikiwiki` user as
created above. Two solutions, respectively a global and a local one:

* Either set the `UMASK` in `.gitolite.rc` to `027`. It means that from now on
  all the git repositories that gitolite creates will be accessible by users
  belonging to the `git` group.

* Or, in `conf/gitolite.conf`, set the wiki repository to be accessible by the
  `git` group, as shown below. Make sure to set `$GIT_CONFIG_KEYS` in
  `.gitolite.rc` to an appropriate value (e.g. `'.*'` to be really permissive),
  so the `config` key gets properly evaluated.

    repo    wiki
        RW+ = ikiwiki
        config core.sharedRepository = true

More details on gitolite's configuration
[here](http://gitolite.com/gitolite/rc.html).

Now, commit and push the gitolite configuration to create the git bare
repository for the wiki. Make sure it was created properly, that is with the
right permissions:

    $ sudo ls -ld /srv/git/repositories/wiki.git/
    drwxr-x--- 7 git git 4096 Jan 10 13:56 /srv/git/repositories/wiki.git/

# Connect ikiwiki and the bare git repository

First the source directory needs to be checked in git:

    $ cd /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.src
    $ git init
    $ echo /.ikiwiki > .gitignore
    $ git add .
    $ git commit -m "initial commit"

Then the source directory can be connected to the bare repository that is under
gitolite management:

    $ git remote add origin git@localhost:wiki
    $ git config branch.master.merge refs/heads/master
    $ git config branch.master.remote origin

Finally, the source directory can be pushed into the bare git repository:

    $ git push --all

# Automatic ikiwiki regeneration

For ikiwiki to generate a git `post-update` hook, it must know the source
directory is now checked into git. Modify the option called `rcs` in the wiki
setup file:

* `rcs: git`

The setup file has to be reloaded for the options related to git to appear:

    $ ikiwiki --changesetup /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.setup

Edit again the wiki setup file and define the path of the git `post-update`
hook that ikiwiki will generate:

* `git_wrapper: /srv/ikiwiki/hooks/wiki.post-update`

Relaunch ikiwiki to generate the hook:

    $ ikiwiki --setup /srv/ikiwiki/wiki.setup

For the hook to be automatically called, and to regenerate the html output
accordingly, it must be linked to the bare git repository that is under
gitolite management:

    $ sudo -u git ln -s /srv/ikiwiki/hooks/wiki.post-update /srv/git/repositories/wiki.git/hooks/post-update

# Enjoy

Any push to the git bare repository (respecting the typical workflow of
gitolite) should now automatically regenerate the html output.
