[[!meta title="Tips in LaTeX"]]
[[!tag LaTeX]]

## Automatic generation of exams and solutions

As a [[teacher|work/teaching]], it so happens that often I have to write exams.
For that I use the powerful LaTeX, but even though there are already quite a
few exam classes out there, I usually find them to bloated.

That is why I came up with my own solution to write exams. In my solution, you
write only one source file, containing both questions and solutions, and you
get two outputs automatically: the teacher's version with the solution, and the
students' version without the solution but with empty boxes instead so they can
fill in their answers directly on the document.

### The environment that does it all

First of all, for the new environment to work, you have to include one extra
package, the `ifthen` package. This package makes it possible to distinguish
between the teacher's and the students' versions of the document.

Now the new environment that you have to define at the beginning of the
document (i.e. before the `\begin{document}`) is as follows:

    \newenvironment{solution}[1]{%
        \ifthenelse{\isundefined{\teacher}}{%
            \fbox{\begin{minipage}{\linewidth}\hfill\vspace*{#1}\end{minipage}}%
        }{}%
        \newbox\tempbox%
        \begin{lrbox}{\tempbox}\begin{minipage}{\linewidth}%
    }{%
        \end{minipage}\end{lrbox}%
        \ifthenelse{\not\isundefined{\teacher}}{%
            \medskip%
            \fbox{\usebox{\tempbox}}%
            \medskip%
        }{}%
    }

Basically, everything that is contained between `\begin{solution}` and
`\end{solution}` commands, will only be displayed in the teacher's version. In
the students' version, the environment takes an argument, which is the vertical
space that the empty box should take on the document (so that students can
write down their answer).

### Usage

Here is an example of using this new environment (extracted from a real test):

    \paragraph{Question #1 (1 point)} What are the three general-purpose
    registers of a MIPS32 processor that the kernel does not have to save when
    context switching?

    \begin{solution}{5cm}
        $26, $27 et $0.
    \end{solution}

In the teacher's version, we will see the solution in a box that fits the
answer. But in the students' version, they just have an empty box of 5cm in
height to propose their answer.

### Makefile

Now we have to write a Makefile that will automatically generate both the
teacher's and the students' versions.

Assuming that the document is called `exam.tex`, here is a simple Makefile that
would work:

    SRC_BASE=exam

    all: $(SRC_BASE)_students.pdf $(SRC_BASE)_teacher.pdf

    %_students.pdf: %.tex
    	pdflatex -jobname $*_students $<

    %_teacher.pdf: %.tex
    	pdflatex -jobname $*_teacher "\def\teacher{true} \include{$*}"

Enjoy!

### Further explanations

Let us look further at the definition of this new environment. As explained on
the [LaTeX
wikibook](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Macros#New_Environments), a
`newenvironment` command receives several arguments:

    \newenvironment{name}[num]{before}{after}

* `name` is the name of the environment
* `num` is the optional number of arguments accepted by the environment (in our
  case, the height of the box)
* `before` is what is processed when encountering a `\begin{name}`
* `after` is what is processed when encountering a `\end{name}`

#### Understanding the teacher's version

When in teacher's version, meaning `\teacher` is defined (see Makefile above to
understand how), the environment macro will be expanded as follows (notice that
since `\isdefined` does not seem to exist, we had to use `\not\isundefined` to
perform the same condition):

    \newenvironment{solution}[1]{%
        \newbox\tempbox%
        \begin{lrbox}{\tempbox}\begin{minipage}{\linewidth}%
    }{%
        \end{minipage}\end{lrbox}%
        \medskip%
        \fbox{\usebox{\tempbox}}%
        \medskip%
    }

Basically, when encountering a `\begin{solution}`, we will create a `lrbox`
(save box) in which we define a `minipage`. The `minipage` occupies a full line
in width (`linewidth`). In the `after` part, we close the `minipage` and the
`lrbox`. Now the interesting thing is that `lrbox` actually saves all the text
that is between our `\begin{solution}` and `\end{solution}` in the temporary
object, `\tempbox`, that was defined with `\newbox`.

The `lrbox` environment does not print anything until invoked. And this is
exactly what we do when declaring a `\fbox`, in which we finally print the
content of the saved `lrbox` by calling `\usebox` with the corresponding name.

If we recall the example above, the environment would be fully expanded as
follows:

    \medskip
    \fbox{
        \begin{minipage}{\linewidth}
            $26, $27 et $0.
        \end{minipage}
    }
    \medskip

#### Understanding the students' version

When in students' version, meaning `\teacher` is not defined, the environment
macro will be expanded as follow:

    \newenvironment{solution}[1]{%
        \fbox{\begin{minipage}{\linewidth}\hfill\vspace*{#1}\end{minipage}}%
        \newbox\tempbox%
        \begin{lrbox}{\tempbox}\begin{minipage}{\linewidth}%
    }{%
        \end{minipage}\end{lrbox}%
    }

So now, when encountering a `\begin{solution}`, we will create a `fbox` (framed
box) in which we define a `minipage`. The `minipage` takes a full line in width
(`linewidth`), and contains a vertical space specified by the argument
(`\vspace*{#1}`).

The second line creates a `lrbox` that saves all the text that is between our
`\begin{solution}` and `\end{solution}`. Contrarily to the teacher's version
though, in the `after` part, we just close the `minipage` and the `lrbox` but
we do not invoke what we saved in the `lrbox` which means the solution is not
displayed.

If we recall the example above, the environment would be fully expanded as
follows:

    \fbox{
        \begin{minipage}{\linewidth}
            \hfill
            \vspace*{5cm}
        \end{minipage}
    }

