[[!meta title="How to make Konsole play well with vim mappings"]]
[[!tag konsole vim]]

# Introduction

In regular graphical applications, (almost) all key combinations are recognized
but it is unfortunately not always the case for console applications. The
problem lies in *terminal emulation*.

Basically, if I hit `Backspace` in Konsole, then Konsole will send to the
console application the ASCII code `0x7F` which corresponds to `DEL`. And by
default, no modifier (namely `Shift`, `Ctrl`, `Alt`, etc.) changes which code
is sent when `Backspace` is pressed.

However, it would be quite nice to have different behaviors for modified keys,
such as `Enter` and `Backspace`, especially with vim but also with zsh.

With vim, for example, I'd like to have the following mappings to work:

    " jump to tag
    nnoremap <C-CR> <C-]>
    " jump to tag but split vertically first
    nnoremap <S-CR> <C-w>v<C-]>
    " jump back
    nnoremap <C-BS> <C-T>

As you have certainly understood from the snippet above, the mappings are for
navigating into some source code with ctags or cscope, and using
`Control-Enter` for jump to a tag definition, and `Control-Backspace` for
jumping back.

Those mappings work out of the box in gvim, because as a graphical application,
gvim receives directly the right key combinations. But once again, vim will not
receive those key combinations because Konsole will not send them: by default,
Konsole sends the same codes for `Enter` and `Control-Enter`, and for
`Backspace` and `Control-Backspace`.

# Konsole

The first thing to do is to modify the codes Konsole sends out for the key
combinations we're interested in. For that, go to Setting and start editing
your profile. Under the tab named Keyboard, you can modify the key bindings.

By default, you should find the following bindings:

    Backspace            : "\x7f"

    Return+Shift         : "\EOM"
    Return-Shift+NewLine : "\r\n"
    Return-Shift-NewLine : "\r"

And, it should be modified to have the following new bindings:

    Backspace+AnyModifier       : "\E[9;*~"
    Backspace-AnyModifier       : "\x7f"

    Return+AnyModifier          : "\E[10;*~"
    Return+NewLine-AnyModifier  : "\r\n"
    Return-NewLine-AnyModifier  : "\r"

For `Backspace`, it means that:

 * Pressing `Backspace` without any modifier (i.e. `-AnyModifier`) will send
   the same ASCII code as before.
 * Pressing `Backspace` with a modifier (i.e. `+AnyModifier`) will send a
   special *Escape Sequence*. The star is in the binding definition will be
   replaced by the corresponding modifier: for example, pressing
   `Shift+Backspace` will send `\E[9;2~`, and `Ctrl+Backspace` will send
   `\E[9;5~`.

And for `Return`, it is the same idea.

For more information about *Escape Sequences*, you can read the [Xterm Escape
Sequences](http://rtfm.etla.org/xterm/ctlseq.html) document.

Especially, the list of possible modifiers is the following:

| Code | Modifiers             |
| ---- | --------------------- |
| 2    | Shift                 |
| 3    | Alt                   |
| 4    | Shift + Alt           |
| 5    | Control               |
| 6    | Shift + Control       |
| 7    | Alt + Control         |
| 8    | Shift + Alt + Control |

Note that the sequences `\E[9;*~` and `\E[10;*~` were kind of arbitrarily
chosen, but it seems they are free sequences. Also in some [Ubuntu
HowTo](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/HowToReadline), they use `\E[9;*~` so
it looked like a good idea to do the same.

# Vim

Now that Konsole is able to send different codes for the different key
combinations, it is time to configure vim in order to map use of them!

For that, you just have to add as many vim mappings as necessary:

    " Ctrl-Return
    nmap <Esc>[10;5~ <C-CR>
    " Shift-Return
    nmap <Esc>[10;2~ <S-CR>
    " Ctrl-Backspace
    nmap <Esc>[9;5~ <C-BS>
    " etc.

Be careful that for those mappings, you do not want to use `noremap` because
you actually want to be able to remap them.

# Zsh

For zsh, it is quite easy and straightforward as well. In my case, I want
`Alt-Backspace` to delete words and `Ctrl-Backspace` to delete complete paths:

    # default value for $WORDCHARS
    export DEF_WORDCHARS='*?_-.[]~=/&;!#$%^(){}<>'
    # take out the slash, period, angle brackets, dash and underscore here.
    export WORDCHARS=${DEF_WORDCHARS//[\/.<>-_]}

    # Alt-Backspace
    bindkey "\e[9;3~" backward-delete-word

    # Ctrl-Backspace
    backward-delete-path() {
        local WORDCHARS=${DEF_WORDCHARS}
        zle backward-delete-word
    }
    zle -N backward-delete-path
    bindkey "\e[9;5~" backward-delete-path
