[[!meta title="Postdoc at Sorbonne University"]]

# Porting Linux to the TSAR processor architecture

During this postdoc at Sorbonne University, from May 2013 to February 2015, I
ported the Linux kernel to a new processor architecture named TSAR.

A page description and a poster were [[published|publications]] in 2015 at the
_conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe_ (DATE'2015).

## The TSAR processor architecture

[TSAR](https://www-soc.lip6.fr/trac/tsar), which stands for Tera-Scale
ARchitecture, is an European MEDEA project, led by BULL. This project aims at
defining a scalable, coherent shared-memory, multi-core architecture.

TSAR is a clusterized architecture, organized in a 2D mesh topology. Each
cluster (or node) contains up to 4 processors, a couple peripheral devices, a
local interconnect and one physical memory bank. Clusters are interconnected
with each other using a global interconnect, which is a distributed
network-on-chip.

There is also an I/O cluster, slightly outside of the regular mesh, which
contains system peripheral devices.

## Porting Linux

Using MIPS32-compatible processor cores, it was unfortunately not necessary to
port GCC to TSAR. Having a drastically different memory management system
than those used for MIPS processors, porting Linux from scratch was however
mandatory.

At the end of my work, the port of Linux was able to support:

- uniprocessor and multiprocessor systems,
- **NUMA** systems (booting on a 96-core prototype), with support for topology and
  complex high memory arrangements,
- early_printk,
- KGDB,
- device tree descriptions,
- multiple drivers: a block device with integrated DMA, a terminal, a simple
  timer, a simple interrupt controller unit, and a complex generic interrupt
  controller (with integrated timer and software interrupts),
- etc.

## Porting other tools

Porting the Linux kernel is usually not sufficient if one wants to run
full-featured applications. That is why, along with the Linux kernel were ported
to the TSAR architecture:

- [uCLibc](|http://www.uclibc.org/), a libc dedicated to embedded systems, with
  support for NPTL,
- [Buildroot](http://buildroot.uclibc.org/), a rootfs images generator,
- [crosstool-ng](http://crosstool-ng.org/), etc.

