[[!meta title="Postdoc at Columbia University"]]

# General information

During this postdoc at Columbia University, from September 2011 to October
2012, I proposed a new implementation of the DIFT (Dynamic Information Flow
Tracking) concept that is better suited for heterogeneous designs, i.e.
multi-processor systems with hardware accelerators.

DIFT is a security concept that finds widespread use in security, privacy and
program analysis, by tagging each piece of data in a system and verifying in
real-time that the data is not misused.

This work involved developing new SystemC simulations models (e.g. write-back
processor caches, hardware security wrappers, hardware accelerators), using the
[SoCLib](http://www.soclib.fr/) simulation framework. I also wrote kernel
libraries (e.g. a security module in the [MutekH](http://www.mutekh.org/)
exo-kernel), ported multi-thread multimedia applications, etc.

The results of this work were published in an international conference
(International Conference on Hardware/Software Codesign and System Synthesis,
2013).

# Paper abstract

In this paper, we describe for the ﬁrst time, how Dynamic Information Flow
Tracking (DIFT) can be implemented for heterogeneous designs that contain one
or more on-chip accelerators attached to a network-on-chip. We observe that
implementing DIFT for such systems requires holistic platform level view, i.e.,
designing individual components in the heterogeneous system to be capable of
supporting DIFT is necessary but not sufficient to correctly implement
full-system DIFT. Based on this observation we present a new system
architecture for implementing DIFT, and also describe wrappers that provide
DIFT functionality for third-party IP components. Results show that our
implementation minimally impacts performance of programs that do not utilize
DIFT, and the price of security is constant for modest amounts of tagging and
then sub-linearly increases with the amount of tagging.
